---
title: "Conflicts between Shared Path Users"
order-number: 9
version: improved
---
Public comments submitted in response to the ANPRM expressed concern
about the risk of collisions between pedestrians who are blind or have
low vision and bicyclists who pass them too closely at fast speeds, and
at intersections where a shared use path crosses another shared use path
or a sidewalk. According to the AASHTO Guide, the 85th percentile speed
for recreational bicyclists is 18 miles per hour. See AASHTO Guide,
5.2.4 Design Speed. The comments noted that bicycles are relatively
quiet and pedestrians who are blind or have low vision may not be aware
when bicyclists are approaching and passing them or crossing their path
at intersections. Pedestrians with other disabilities may also have
limited awareness of approaching bicyclists. For example, individuals
who are deaf or hard of hearing may not be aware of a bicycle
approaching from behind even when riders indicate their presence
audibly. Individuals with limited mobility who may be alert to
bicyclists may find it difficult to move aside in time to avoid
collision. The comments recommended that traffic on shared use paths be
regulated and strictly enforced in order to protect pedestrians. For
example, a comment stated that bicyclists should be required to always
yield to pedestrians. The comments also recommended design solutions to
avoid conflicts between users, including separate pathways for
pedestrians and bicyclists; and detectable warning surfaces at
intersections where a shared use path crosses another shared use path or
a sidewalk. These design solutions are discussed below.

*Separate Pathways for Pedestrians and Bicyclists\
*

An organization representing individuals who are blind and have
low-vision stated that \"all shared use paths present an unacceptable
safety risk to blind or visually impaired pedestrians unless there is a
clear separation between pedestrians and other motorized and
non-motorized vehicles including bicyclists.\" The comments noted that
path users cannot be expected to always follow the \"rules of the road\"
and suggested that if paths cannot be physically separated that lanes
for pedestrians and other users should be marked tactilely. An
organization of educators and rehabilitation professionals who work with
individuals who are blind suggested that blind pedestrians may have
considerable difficulty maintaining the course, particularly on
two-directional shared use paths where all users are expected to travel
on the right hand side of the path in each direction and bicyclists pass
pedestrians and slower moving path users on their left hand side. In
addition to the recommendation to physically separate pedestrians and
bicyclists, the comments suggested that it may be necessary to separate
the two directions of travel within each pathway, particularly on busy
paths. The comments, however, acknowledged that determining what volume
of users should require two-directional separation would be a challenge.

The AASHTO Guide makes a number of recommendations to minimize conflicts
between pedestrians and bicyclists. These recommendations include
required sight triangles to ensure that bicyclists have the needed
yielding distance to avoid conflicts, and additional width around
horizontal curves to allow safe distance between users. See AASHTO
5.2.8, Stopping Sight Distance. The AAHSTO Guide also recommends use of
a centerline stripe within a path to provide directional separation and
to indicate when passing is permitted. For paths with \"extremely heavy
volume\", the AASHTO Guide recommends two alternatives for segregation
of pedestrians and bicyclists. The first option is to provide separate
lanes within a single path; pedestrians have a bidirectional lane and
bicyclists have two one-directional lanes. Such separation is not
recommended unless a minimum path width of 15 feet can be provided (10
feet for bicycles and 5 feet for pedestrians). A second alternative is
to physically separate user groups, particularly where the pathway
volume is \"extremely heavy\" and where sites and settings, such as one
that constricts the path width, necessitate divergent pathways.
Physically separated pathways also are recommended where the origins and
destinations of pedestrians and bicyclists differ. The AAHSTO Guide
notes that both alternatives (lane separation and physical separation)
may not be effective unless the volume of bicycle traffic is sufficient
to discourage pedestrians from encroaching into the bicycle lanes and
that these solutions will not necessarily be needed for the full length
of a shared use path. See AASHTO Guide, 5.2.1 Width and Clearance.

We agree with the comments that physical separation between pedestrians
and other users would likely render shared use paths safer for, and more
accessible to, individuals with disabilities and others. However, the
AASHTO Guide does not recommend physical separation of user groups
unless the traffic volume or other considerations make separate pathways
necessary. The AASHTO Guide provides little guidance regarding methods
for determining the point at which traffic volume or other
considerations would justify separation of the pathways. In the absence
of any data on which to base such a requirement, we are not proposing to
require physically separated pathways for pedestrians and bicyclists.
The impact of such a requirement if applied to the full length of all
shared use paths would likely result in many not being constructed due
to the increased costs associated with more land and the need to
engineer and construct two pathways instead of one.

The comments suggested that enhanced signage and warnings, including
audible signs and tactile pavement markings would improve the ability of
blind pedestrians to remain within their lanes. In Great Britain,
tactile pavement markings are used to indicate bicycle and pedestrian
lanes. A ladder pattern is used to indicate the start and end of the
pedestrian lane; a tramline pattern is used to indicate the start and
end of the bicycle lane; and a tactile dividing line is used to indicate
the separation between the
lanes.[3](conflicts-between-shared-path-users.html#3) At least one U.S.
manufacturer makes tactile pavement markings for shared use paths. We
request comments on whether tactile pavement markings have been used on
any shared use paths in the U.S. and the experience with such markings.
We also request comments on other design solutions to reduce potential
conflicts between pedestrians who are blind or have low vision and
bicyclists. Comments should include factors that would make such
solutions necessary.

We are considering including an advisory section in the final
accessibility guidelines on separate pathways for pedestrians and
bicyclists. Advisory sections are not mandatory requirements but provide
guidance for entities who want to exceed the minimum requirements for
accessible design. We request comments on information to include in the
advisory section.

*Detectable Warning Surfaces at Shared Use Path Intersections*

Detectable warning surfaces consist of small truncated domes that are
integral to a walking surface and that are detectable underfoot. The
proposed accessibility guidelines for pedestrian facilities in the
public right-of-way would require the use of detectable warning surfaces
to indicate the boundary between a pedestrian route and a vehicular
route where there is a curb ramp or blended transition; and the boundary
of passenger boarding platforms at transit stops for buses and rail
vehicles and at passenger boarding and alighting areas at sidewalk or
street level transit stops for rail vehicles. See R208 and R305.

Because pedestrians who are blind would not be aware of bicyclists
approaching from the left or right hand side at intersections, we are
considering including a requirement in the final accessibility
guidelines to provide detectable warning surfaces where a shared use
path intersects another shared use path or a sidewalk to indicate the
boundaries where bicyclists may be crossing the intersection. The edge
of the detectable warning surface would be installed between 6 inches
minimum and 12 inches maximum from the edge of the intersecting segments
of the shared use paths and sidewalks. The detectable warning surface
would extend 2 feet minimum in the direction of pedestrian travel and
the full width of the intersecting segments. We request comments on this
issue.
:::

[]{.clear}
