---
title: "Supplemental Notice-about"
order-number: 13
version: improved
---
This supplemental notice of proposed rulemaking (SNPRM) proposes to
include specific provisions for shared use paths in the proposed
accessibility guidelines for pedestrian facilities in the public
right-of-way published in the Federal Register on July 26, 2011. See 76
FR 44664 (July 26, 2011). A copy of the proposed accessibility
guidelines for pedestrian facilities in the public right-of-way with the
specific provisions for shared use paths proposed in the SNPRM is
available below.

We are required by section 502 of the Rehabilitation Act to establish
and maintain accessibility guidelines for the design, construction, and
alteration of facilities covered by the Americans with Disabilities Act
(ADA) and the Architectural Barriers Act (ABA) to ensure that the
facilities are readily accessible to and usable by individuals with
disabilities. See 29 U.S.C. 792 (b) (3). The ADA covers state and local
government facilities, places of public accommodation, and commercial
facilities. See 42 U.S.C. 12101 et seq. The ABA covers facilities
financed with federal funds. See 42 U.S.C. 4151 et seq.

We are issuing the SNPRM in response to public comments on separate
rulemakings to develop accessibility guidelines for trails and other
outdoor developed areas, and for sidewalks and other pedestrian
facilities in the public right-of-way. The comments noted that shared
use paths are distinct from trails and sidewalks, and recommended that
we develop accessibility guidelines for shared use paths. As defined in
the SNPRM, shared use paths are multi-use paths designed primarily for
use by bicyclists and pedestrians, including pedestrians with
disabilities, for transportation and recreation purposes. Shared use
paths are physically separated from motor vehicle traffic by an open
space or barrier, and are either within the highway right-of-way or
within an independent right-of-way.

As noted above, the SNPRM would include specific provisions for shared
use paths in the proposed accessibility guidelines for pedestrian
facilities in the public right-of-way. The proposed accessibility
guidelines for pedestrian facilities in the public right-of-way would
require pedestrian access routes to be provided within pedestrian
circulation paths located in the public right-of-way, and would
establish proposed technical provisions for the width, grade, cross
slope, and surface of pedestrian access routes. See R204.2 and R302.
Where existing pedestrian circulation paths are altered and existing
physical constraints make it impracticable for the altered paths to
fully comply with the proposed technical provisions, compliance would be
required to the extent practicable. See R202.3.1.

The SNPRM would:

-   Require the full width of a shared use path to comply with the
    proposed technical provisions for the grade, cross slope, and
    surface of pedestrian access routes (see R302.3.2);
-   Permit compliance with the proposed technical provisions for the
    grade of pedestrian access routes to the extent practicable where
    physical constraints or regulatory constraints prevent full
    compliance (see R302.5.4 and R302.5.5);
-   Prohibit objects from overhanging or protruding into any portion of
    a shared use path at or below 8 feet measured from the finished
    surface (see R210.3); and
-   Require the width of curb ramps and blended transitions in shared
    use paths to be equal to the width of the shared use path (see
    R304.5.1.2).

The SNPRM is consistent with the design criteria for shared used paths
in the American Association of State Highway and Transportation
Officials (AASHTO) \"Guide for the Development of Bicycle Facilities\"
(2012) (hereinafter referred to as the \"AASHTO Guide\"). The SNPRM is
not expected to increase the cost of constructing shared use paths for
state and local government jurisdictions that use the AASHTO Guide.

As discussed in the preamble to the proposed accessibility guidelines
for pedestrian facilities in the public right-of-way, other federal
agencies are required to adopt accessibility standards for the design,
construction, and alteration of facilities covered by the ADA and ABA
that are consistent with our accessibility guidelines. When the other
federal agencies adopt accessibility standards for the design,
construction, and alteration of pedestrian facilities in the public
right-of-way, including shared use paths, covered by the ADA and ABA,
compliance with the standards is mandatory.
